alembic-migrations/README.md, before:

<!-- vi: tw=119
-->

# Welcome to `alembic-migrations` directory

This directory contains all of our database migrations.

## What are database migrations?

In case you aren't familiar, a database migration is essentially just a set of SQL instructions that should be
performed, to get your database into the state that we expect it to be in.

The thing is, as software changes, the requirements for the database structure change alongside with it and that means
that anyone who would like to update this application to a newer version will also need to find a way to get their
database up to date with any changes that were made.

If people had to do this manually, it would mean going through diffs and checking what exactly changed in the relevant
files, then using some tool where they can run SQL commands, figuring out what commands to even run to properly get
everything up to date without losing any existing information and finally actually running them.

Clearly, this isn't ideal, especially for people who just want to use this bot as it's being updated and don't know
much about SQL and databases. For that reason, we decided to instead keep the instructions for these migrations in
individual version files, which people can simply execute to get their database up to date (or even to downgrade it,
in case someone needs to test out an older version of the bot).

## How to use these migrations?

We're using [`alembic`](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/index.html), which is a tool that makes generating and
applying migrations very easy. If you just wish to get your application up-to-date, all you need to do is run:

```bash
alembic upgrade head
```

This will run all of the migrations one by one, from the last previously executed migrations (if you haven't run the
command before, it will simply run each one). Alembic will then keep track of the revision id (basically the specific
migration file) that was applied and store that id into your database (Alembic will create it's own database table for
this). That way, alembic will always know what version is your current database at.

> [!TIP]
> You can also run `alembic check`, to see if there are any pending migrations that you haven't yet applied.

## How to create migrations? (for developers)

If you're adding a new database table, deleting it, or just changing it somehow, you will want to create a new
migration file for it. Thankfully, alembic makes this very easy too. All you need to do is run:

```bash
alembic revision --autogenerate -m "Some message (e.g.: Added users table)"
```

In most cases, this will be all that you need to do, alembic will automatically up any changes you made in the python
code, recognize what to do to get the existing database up to date with them and create the migration file with
instructions for it.

That said, alembic has it's limitations and in some cases, the automatic generation doesn't work, or doesn't do what
we'd like it to do. For example, if you rename a table, alembic can't understand that this was a rename, rather than a
deletion of one table and a creation of another. This is a problem, because instead of simply renaming while keeping
the old existing data, alembic will generate instructions that would lead to losing those old data.

In these cases, you will need to do some extra work and edit the migration files yourself. In case auto-generation
fails completely, you can run the same command without that `--autogenerate` flag, which will generate an empty
migration file, that you'll need to fill out.

That said, in vast majority of cases, you will not need to write your migrations manually. For more info on when you
might need to, check [the documentation][alembic-autogeneration-autodetection].

> [!IMPORTANT]
> After generating a migration, don't forget to also apply it yourself (`alembic upgrade head`).

[alembic-autogeneration-autodetection]: https://guide.pycord.dev/getting-started/creating-your-first-bot#creating-the-bot-application

Commit message:

Automatically run alembic migrations when needed

alembic-migrations/README.md, after:

<!-- vi: tw=119
-->

# Welcome to `alembic-migrations` directory

This directory contains all of our database migrations.

## What are database migrations?

In case you aren't familiar, a database migration is essentially just a set of SQL instructions that should be
performed, to get your database into the state that we expect it to be in.

The thing is, as software changes, the requirements for the database structure change alongside with it and that means
that anyone who would like to update this application to a newer version will also need to find a way to get their
database up to date with any changes that were made.

If people had to do this manually, it would mean going through diffs and checking what exactly changed in the relevant
files, then using some tool where they can run SQL commands, figuring out what commands to even run to properly get
everything up to date without losing any existing information and finally actually running them.

Clearly, this isn't ideal, especially for people who just want to use this bot as it's being updated and don't know
much about SQL and databases. For that reason, we decided to instead keep the instructions for these migrations in
individual version files, which people can simply execute to get their database up to date (or even to downgrade it,
in case someone needs to test out an older version of the bot).

## How to use these migrations?

We're using [`alembic`](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/index.html), which is a tool that makes generating and
applying migrations very easy. Additionally, we have some custom logic in place, to make sure that all migrations that
weren't yet applied will automatically be ran once the application is started, so you don't actually need to do
anything to apply them.

That said, if you would want to apply the migrations manually, without having to start the bot first, you can do so
with the command below:

```bash
alembic upgrade head
```

This will run all of the migrations one by one, from the last previously executed migrations (if you haven't run the
command before, it will simply run each one). Alembic will then keep track of the revision id (basically the specific
migration file) that was applied and store that id into your database (Alembic will create it's own database table for
this). That way, alembic will always know what version is your current database at.

> [!TIP]
> You can also run `alembic check`, to see if there are any pending migrations that you haven't yet applied.

## How to create migrations? (for developers)

If you're adding a new database table, deleting it, or just changing it somehow, you will want to create a new
migration file for it. Thankfully, alembic makes this very easy too. All you need to do is run:

```bash
alembic revision --autogenerate -m "Some message (e.g.: Added users table)"
```

In most cases, this will be all that you need to do, alembic will automatically up any changes you made in the python
code, recognize what to do to get the existing database up to date with them and create the migration file with
instructions for it.

That said, alembic has it's limitations and in some cases, the automatic generation doesn't work, or doesn't do what
we'd like it to do. For example, if you rename a table, alembic can't understand that this was a rename, rather than a
deletion of one table and a creation of another. This is a problem, because instead of simply renaming while keeping
the old existing data, alembic will generate instructions that would lead to losing those old data.

In these cases, you will need to do some extra work and edit the migration files yourself. In case auto-generation
fails completely, you can run the same command without that `--autogenerate` flag, which will generate an empty
migration file, that you'll need to fill out.

That said, in vast majority of cases, you will not need to write your migrations manually. For more info on when you
might need to, check [the documentation][alembic-autogeneration-autodetection].

[alembic-autogeneration-autodetection]: https://guide.pycord.dev/getting-started/creating-your-first-bot#creating-the-bot-application
